A voluminous literature addresses the weaknesses of stated preference methods used to value non-market environmental goods and services, such as contingent valuation and choice experiment. Two of the most important criticisms addressed at these methods are the following. First, respondants typically need time and thinking before they can form a meaningful answer about their willingness to pay for such subtle matters as environmental questions, but standard willingness to pay methods do not consider ways of helping respondants form their preferences. Another important criticism refers to the idea that methods based on stated preferences would discourage respondents from acting as citizens, in particular by taking into account the social implications of their choices and statements.
Deliberative monetary valuation (DMV) has emerged as a prominent alternative to these methods. It combines deliberative institutions with preference elicitation. 
Despite an anchorage in an extensive philosophical literature on deliberative democracy, the theoretical foundations of DMV are underinvestigated.  
A noteworthy exception is Bartkowski and Lienhoop's effort to use Sen's philosophical views to elaborate such theoretical foundations. 
The present article pursues this theoretical effort by pointing out two issues left unanswered by the above contribution.
The first issue is the precise role that deliberation is expected to play in DMV and, more broadly, in environmental decision-making (we term this the aim of deliberation issue). 
The second issue is the role that economists and consultants involved in the proceedings of deliberation are supposed to play (we term this the role of the analyst issue).
In order to clarify the kind of investigations that DMV or any alternative method should implement to be unequivocal on these issues, we use a formal framework introduced by Cailloux and Meinard, designed to capture the stance that an individual has on a given topic once she has performed a deliberation: her “deliberated judgment”.  This notion captures in our view, two central ideas.
The first idea, nicknamed “rationality” for simplicity, is that deliberated judgments are the result of a careful examination of arguments and counter-arguments: through deliberation, the individual gathers new information, he learns about the viewpoints of other people, he takes the time to think about all these elements, which are all arguments for or against this or that stance. This idea echoes the approach to the notion of rationality developed most prominently by Habermas. In his approach, actions, attitudes or utterances can be termed “rational” so long as the actor performing or having them can account for them, explain them and use arguments and counter-arguments to withstand criticisms that other people could raise against them.
The second idea, nicknamed “anti-paternalism”, is that deliberated judgments are nevertheless the individual's own judgments, in the sense that they do not reflect the application of any exogenous criterion.
We define the deliberated judgements of an individual formally, using a topic, a set of arguments S (arguing in favor or against propositions in the topic), and empirically observable relations describing the attitude of the individual towards the arguments in the set S. We also define what we call a model of the deliberated judgment of an individual, and define how such a model can be empirically falsified, by confronting its claims to the individual’s behavior towards arguments.
Aided by these formal definitions, we relate the notions of rationality and anti-paternalism on which our proposal rests to contemporary normative philosophy, in which various forms of these notions play a key role. Indeed, the search for a compromise, an equilibrium or a satisfactory articulation between these two requirements can be seen as a key thread running through contemporary political philosophy.
A case in point is Rawls’s notion of a “reflective equilibrium”.
Following Goodman, Rawls used “reflective equilibrium” to refer to a “process of mutual adjustment of principles and considered judgments”. This formulation highlights that, in Rawls’s Theory of Justice, a prominent role attributed to this concept was to do justice both to people’s moral intuitions and to the need to systematize visions of justice. As for the reference to principles, and the idea that the judgments to be taken into account are the ones that can be termed “considered”, they echo our rationality requirement, if one admits that judgments are “considered” when they are buttressed on a careful analysis of arguments and counterarguments, and that principles systematizing considered judgments provide strong arguments in favor of these judgments.
Rawls's “reflective equilibrium” hence embodies the two ideas forming the core of our concept of deliberated judgment.
Our approach also echoes Habermas’s distinction between ethics and the normative basis of communicative action. Just like Habermas, who does not question the latter, but accept ethical pluralism, we do not question the normative credentials of the ideas of rationality and anti-paternalism, but we claim that all the other normative notions should be involved in the deliberative process. Further, it gives an empirical and precise description of what should be tested to verify whether deliberation has done its job.
We conclude that the notion of deliberated judgment allows to identify empirical questions that DMV do not tackle whereas answering these questions would be necessary to clarify the stance that DMV takes on the aim of the deliberation issue. When it comes to the role of the analyst issue, the deliberated judgment approach advocates an active role of the practitioner in creating models of deliberated judgments. 
